Detective Recapped here. Today, I'm going
to explain a Drama-Romance film called:
"The Virgin Suicides,” which is a
masterclass in dehumanizing young girls.
After all, the two ways to dehumanize someone
are by dismissing them and by idolizing them.
This movie shows the extreme ends of
the spectrum through a group of teenage
sisters who killed themselves one by one.
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
A man once asked, should I kill myself or
have a cup of coffee? Some believe that
the question of whether or not life is worth
living is the most fundamental query there is.
But even after millennia of human existence,
we still don’t have a universal answer to this
question. And just like us, a certain ragtag
of boys-turned-men will never reach the truth.
In the 1970s, a group of young boys
from the suburbs of Grosse Pointe,
Michigan, obsesses over the five beautiful Lisbon
sisters. After 25 years, the now-grown men recall
the story of how the teenage sisters ended their
lives, still trying to figure out why they did it.
Thirteen-year-old Cecilia first tries killing
herself by slitting her wrists in a bathtub.
Fortunately, she is quickly found and rushed
to the hospital, so she manages to survive.
Upon her recovery, the doctor says that she’s
not even old enough to know how bad life gets.
In turn, Cecilia tells him that he’s
obviously never been a thirteen-year-old girl.
Cecilia and her other sisters, fourteen-year-old
Lux, fifteen-year-old Bonnie, sixteen-year-old
Mary, and seventeen-year-old Therese, continue
to obey their strict Catholic parents.
Their mother, Sara, is a devout housewife while
their father, Ronald, is a Math teacher. Everyone
has an opinion about why Cecilia attempted to end
her life, but the child's motive remains unclear.
People blame her parents, the new kid on the
block, and even the interior design of their
home. During her counseling, Cecilia's doctor
concludes that the little girl didn't actually
want to take her life, but her act was a call
for help. Knowing the girl's parents are strict,
the doctor suggests letting Cecilia interact with
boys her age. Everyone’s looking everywhere for an
answer to Cecilia’s problem, but nobody ever tries
to look at Cecilia herself. When you’re a child,
nobody takes you seriously. People, adults,
especially, prefer projecting their own views
and insecurities onto children without taking a
step back to understand them. And when it comes to
young girls, everyone is all the more dismissive
of them. Cecilia’s already hinted at her personal
plights, yet her doctor just runs some ink blots
by her and assumes that what she needs is a boy.
It’s almost as if Cecilia can’t be a girl
with her own thoughts and her own humanity.
One day, Mr. Lisbon invites one of
his students, Peter, to his house,
as a token of gratitude for helping him
set up a solar system model in class.
While eating, Lux discreetly flirts with the
boy by playfully touching his leg with her feet.
Once dinner is over, Mrs. Lisbon lets
Peter use the bathroom in Cecilia’s room.
There, Peter goes through the girls' stuff,
imagining Lux as he smells a lipstick.
Suddenly, Lux knocks on the door, so Peter lets
her in and watches her as she looks for something.
Noticing Peter standing and staring, she
teasingly asks him to leave the bathroom. After
that incident, Lux has grown more brazen with
alluring the boys and men in the neighborhood.
These boys are likely more than just boys to Lux.
They’re new experiences, a wholly different world
outside of the small one her parents keep her
in. And to see them so acutely enthralled by
her feminine existence, which her parents try
hard to diminish, must be thrilling for her.
Two weeks after Cecilia returns home,
Mr. Lisbon persuades his wife to throw
a party for their girls. Tim and his
friends are all invited to the party,
and the girls seem amused by the boys’
awkward and juvenile charm and humor.
But Cecilia doesn't seem to be having fun
and excuses herself from the party. It isn't
long before everyone hears Mr. Lisbon scream,
and when they all check to see what happened,
they realize that Cecilia has jumped off the
window and impaled herself on the iron fence.
Meanwhile, the neighbors continue to gossip
about the Lisbons as the family gets their
iron fence removed. Tim and his friends come
into possession of Cecilia’s diary after the
plumber's assistant found it in the bathroom.
The boys try to analyze every page of the
notebook in search of anything that will help
them understand why Cecilia did what she did.
Based on her handwriting, one of them concludes
that she’s a dreamer who must’ve thought that
she would fly when she jumped. In one of the
entries, the boys read that Lux once wrote the
garbage man's name all over her underwear. When
Mrs. Lisbon found out about it, she bleached out
her daughter's undergarments and left Lux crying
in bed all day. After reading Cecilia's diary, the
boys get a glimpse into the lives of the Lisbon
sisters and realize the imprisonment of girlhood.
They adopt a dreamy view of girls, and they
believe that girls are just women in disguise.
They even conclude that these girls understood
life, death, and even them, but they, as boys,
would never fathom these little women. It’s
clearer now that these boys have stripped the
sisters of their humanity. To them, girls like
the Lisbon sisters are otherworldly creatures
that they will never understand, so they don’t
even try. But in the end, most of what they’ve
read from Cecilia’s diary entries are painfully
mundane. There’s no mention of her sadness,
of feeling distant from her parents. It’s
almost as if Cecilia is closer to being a
faceted human being than she is the mysterious,
ephemeral angel the boys picture her as.
After some time, a reporter named Lydia Perl
goes to the Lisbon residence and asks Mary and
Bonnie about Cecilia, hoping to write a piece
about the girl. As she interviews the girls,
Mrs. Lisbon shows up and quickly tells her
to leave. However, Lydia proceeds to give
a sensationalized report about Cecilia. Lydia
talks about what some psychologists think of
kids' behaviors, saying their frustration
can sometimes lead to acts of violence.
This leaves the neighbors wondering why they
couldn't just let the poor girl rest in peace.
That night, Mr. Lisbon hallucinates and sees
Cecilia in her bedroom, looking towards her
open window. As he closes it, Mr. Lisbon is
startled when Bonnie calls him. She tells him not
to worry since the iron fence has already been
taken out. Meanwhile, Tim dreams about Cecilia
sitting on his bed and watching him sleep, while
his other friend, Chase, sees Cecilia on a tree.
The Lisbon girls go back to school as if nothing
happened, and Mr. Lisbon does the same. Due to
the recent event in the neighborhood, the local
school has decided to hand out green pamphlets
to the students, discussing the sensitive issue
of taking one's life. At this point, Cecilia’s
nothing more than a ghost and an idea for everyone
to mourn and yearn for. But most of all, she’s an
object for everyone around her to commodify. From
that pushy reporter, to her school, to the boys
who invade her privacy by picking at her diary,
Cecilia’s just a PSA, a hot topic, and an enigma.
As the siblings move on with their lives,
more boys are starting to flock around Lux
and claim to know her and have slept with her.
However, the only reliable boy who has really
gotten to know Lux is Trip Fontaine, the school
heartthrob. Trip's infatuation with Lux began when
he accidentally entered her class after hiding
from one of his teachers. Since every girl in
school has a crush on Trip, he is intrigued
as to why Lux doesn't find him interesting.
Twenty-five years later, Trip Fontaine talks about
the day he first saw Lux, saying he never got over
her. It doesn’t take long for Lux to follow in
the footsteps of her younger sister at all. Lux,
the fourteen-year-old girl, ceases to exist. She’s
just a beautiful idea to the boys who surround her
and a prize for them to covet. After all, the only
reason that anyone’s paying more attention to her
than the rest of her sisters is because she’s
the one who displays the most sensual maturity.
When Trip finally musters the courage to
ask Lux out, he decides that it's better
to visit her at their house first. Mrs. Lisbon
sits in between Lux and Trip the whole night,
leaving the teens no room for
conversation. Lux, however,
still manages to send a subtle sign of flirting
to Trip, but Mrs. Lisbon still notices it.
When it's finally time for Trip to go home, Lux
walks him to the door and bids him goodbye. Trip
leaves in disappointment then sits in his car.
But to his surprise, Lux suddenly gets in with
him. The two make out in the car passionately, and
when it’s time for Lux to get back into the house,
she leaves her chewing gum inside Trip's
mouth. If you tighten the noose on someone,
they’ll only struggle more. With how strict
and imposing her parents are, it almost feels
natural for the girl to feel and act deprived
of a boy’s attention. But the ironic thing is,
Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon may as well be the ones
who planted the seed of longing in Lux’s heart.
The next day, Trip talks to Mr. Lisbon
to tell him that his intentions for Lux
are entirely honorable. Confused,
Mr. Lisbon asks Trip what he meant,
and the young man says he wants to take Lux
to the Homecoming Dance. Surprised, Mr. Lisbon
asks Trip to sit down then tells him that he and
his wife have certain rules for their children.
And the rules that apply to the older girls
can't be changed for the younger ones.
Mr. Lisbon adds that his wife won't let
him change the rules even if he wanted to,
then invites Trip to come over to their house and
watch TV instead. To clarify things, Mr. Lisbon
tells Trip that he can't take Lux to the dance,
especially in a car. When Trip offers to take out
all of Mr. Lisbon's daughters along with his other
friends and have them back home before curfew, Mr.
Lisbon tells him that he'll talk to his wife about
it first. Upon getting home from work, Mr. Lisbon
immediately tells his wife about Trip's desire
to take Lux and the other girls to the dance.
The Lisbon girls get excited about it, but their
mother is clearly reluctant to let them go. Trying
to convince his wife, Mr. Lisbon assures her it's
going to be fine since he's a chaperone for the
dance, but Mrs. Lisbon wishes to discuss it more
later. The girls seem to have everything they
could need in their house except for autonomy.
They don’t get any input about the dance, and
while it’s expected that they’re thrilled to go,
nobody even asks them what they think. As always,
young girls are rarely given control over their
lives, and Mr. Lisbon was keener to talk things
over with Trip than he was with the girls. But
here, it’s clear that Mr. Lisbon is more open
to letting his daughters explore the world. It’s
Mrs. Lisbon who has her hand tight on their leash.
At school the next day, Mr. Lisbon informs Trip
that he and his wife have decided to let him take
Lux to the Homecoming Dance. During football
practice, Trip tells his friends he's taking
Lux to the dance, adding that he needs three more
guys to come with him to be Lux's sisters' dates.
The girls are ecstatic to learn that their parents
are letting them attend the dance, and when they
finally choose their dresses, Mrs. Lisbon
makes sure that they look proper. Lux, Mary,
Bonnie, and Therese wear modified dresses that
almost look like sacks to conceal their figure,
but that doesn't stop them from being excited
to attend the dance with Trip and his friends.
Mrs. Lisbon greets Trip, Parkie, Kevin, and Joe
when they finally arrive to pick the girls up.
When the girls come down from their rooms, Trip is
completely blown away by Lux's beauty. He and the
boys then put the corsage they've brought to their
dates' dress, and once they leave, Mrs. Lisbon
immediately feels the emptiness in the house. All
parents are worried about their children, but Mrs.
Lisbon is especially anxious and neurotic. This
is what happens when you view your daughters as
little more than symbols of purity who must never
be tainted. Ironically, Mrs. Lisbon dehumanizes
her daughters just like the very boys she’s trying
to protect them against. She barely sees them as
their own individual persons; Mrs. Lisbon just
sees them for the ways they can be corrupted.
On their way to the dance, the girls are
having the time of their lives. They show
that they have keen minds and sharp wits,
as evidenced by their different quips for
their different neighbors. Lux smokes a cigarette
from Trip, making her sisters feel uncomfortable.
Bonnie warns her their father will smell it on
her clothes, but Lux is stubborn, saying she
will just tell him that some kids were smoking in
the bathroom. At school, all the girls look at Lux
and Trip as they arrive together. Later, the two
are hailed as Homecoming King and Queen, and after
they claim their crowns onstage, they join the
students in dancing. The Lisbon sisters are happy,
and they feel a semblance of freedom. Even Mr.
Lisbon can see this, and he’s happy for them.
While everyone is busy, Trip persuades Lux to
go with him for a walk, but Lux is worried that
her father will notice her absence. Determined
to be alone with Lux, Trip tells her to make up
an excuse of going to her locker, and the
girl agrees. Meanwhile, Lux's sisters and
Trip's friends wait for them in the car, wondering
where the two have gone. The boys then take Mary,
Bonnie, and Therese home, while Trip and Lux make
love in the field. When Lux wakes up the next day,
she is confused to learn that Trip has left
her there alone. It’s hardly a mystery as to
why Trip just left Lux. He got what he wanted
from her, and the spell is now broken. Lux is
no longer that unconquerable enigma to him; she’s
now just another one of the girls he slept with.
With no other choice, Lux takes a cab home. While
her father asks her how she is, her mother roughly
demands to know where she’s been. As a grown-up,
Trip recalls how he left Lux sleeping on the
field after they make love. He remembers
how he didn't care if Lux got home safely,
which he finds weird since he really liked her.
Trip feels lucky that he was able to experience
a special kind of love with Lux. Again, this only
reinforces how Lux is just more attractive as an
idea and as a symbol of desire. Trip really
isn’t interested in her as a person. All he
cares about is the thought of being with her
and romanticizing whatever they had. After all,
how can he fall in love with a girl he
hardly spoke to and left after banging?
Because of Lux's mistake, Mrs. Lisbon takes all
her daughters out of school and puts them in
complete isolation. As if that isn't enough,
Mrs. Lisbon orders Lux to destroy her rock
record collection. No matter how much Lux begs her
mother to let her keep them, Mrs. Lisbon is set on
teaching her daughter a lesson. Sobbing, Lux is
forced to burn her vinyl records as her mother
watches. When she couldn't take the burning
smell anymore, Mrs. Lisbon throws them in the
trash instead. Aside from Mrs. Lisbon’s extreme
measure of isolating her daughters from the world,
she went on her little crusade to strip
Lux of her identity, of her hobby that
has nothing to do with her femininity by
forcing her to burn her prized rock records.
Her sisters don’t even have anything to do with
Lux’s mistake, yet she punished them all the same.
No matter Mrs. Lisbon’s intentions, it’s safe to
assume that she has no respect for her daughters’
personal lives. Out of rebellion, Lux starts
the habit of hooking up with different boys and
men on their roof. Unknown to her, she is being
watched by most of the boys in their neighborhood,
who love to gossip about her and pick her apart
once she's done with her little escapades.
Mr. Lisbon, who’s been absentminded the entire
time, is eventually replaced as a Math teacher,
giving their neighbors more things to talk about.
One day, when a tree-cutting company shows up at
the Lisbons' lawn to cut down their elm tree,
the four sisters decide that they won't allow
it since Cecilia loved that tree. As one of the
workers insists that the tree is dead, Lux, Mary,
Bonnie, and Therese hold hands and surround the
tree, saying that they should just leave it up
to nature. Frustrated, the worker talks to Mr.
and Mrs. Lisbon and explains to them that if
they don't cut down their sick elm tree, then the
other trees in the neighborhood will start dying,
too. He even threatens to call the cops if the
girls don't move, but the couple insists that
the girls are simply standing on their own
front lawn. As they argue, the local media
shows up to report on what's happening. Lydia's
back to exploit the situation for TV again, and
she rushes her crew to get footage of the girls in
their nighties. She sensationalizes the situation,
painting the girls as the tragic salvagers of
their late sisters' loving memory. In the end,
the elm tree is finally cut down. This just goes
to show that the objectification, commodification,
romanticization, and all that fun
-ations never end for these girls.
The boys spend so much of their free time making
a feist out of Lux’s promiscuity. The neighbors
treat the family as nothing more than lunchtime
gossip. The media doesn’t hesitate to make a
story out of the sisters without even talking
to them. Everyone has a voice in the sisters’
lives but the sisters themselves. The sad thing
is, the girls have it in them to stand up to a
cutting company to protect a dying tree,
but no one ever stepped in to help them.
As time passes by, the Lisbon sisters remain in
isolation. The neighborhood boys barely see the
sisters, and the girls never talked to their
homecoming dates again. The girls then start
ordering brochures for exotic vacations so
that they could travel even if just in their
imaginations. To feel closer to them, Tim
and his friends order the same brochures,
too, visualizing that they're with the Lisbon
sisters as they go to different places.
To cope with their sadness, the girls begin
to send out notes to the boys, asking them
for help. When Tim and his friends finally
decide to contact the girls through the phone,
he gives them his number before quickly ending
the call. The Lisbon sisters are quick to call the
boys back, but instead of talking to each other,
they would just play some music for all of them to
listen to. The brochure reading, the music playing
over the telephone—these are the only things the
girls could do to stay sane in their maddening
and heartbreaking situation. But to the boys,
these little activities are just a small part
of their day; they’re just trivial things to
do so they can pretend that they’re closer to
the girls. And at the end of the day, they can
go around doing whatever they please because
they’re free to live life the way they want.
One night, the sisters talk to their
mother and tell her how they feel,
saying that they're suffocating. Unmoved, Mrs.
Lisbon insists they're safe there. The next day,
the sisters send out another letter to Tim, asking
him to meet them once he and his friends see the
sisters' signal. As Tim and the other boys wait
from a house across the street, the Lisbon sisters
finally signal them to come over to their place.
Clearly, the girls are planning to do something in
retaliation for their mother's refusal to hear
them out. If only Mrs. Lisbon listened to her
daughters, they'd be able to resolve their problem
in a better way. Unfortunately, Mrs. Lisbon has no
idea that her stubbornness is about to lead to a
tragedy that she and her husband will have to live
with forever. Excited, the boys sneak out to the
Lisbon residence, where they find Lux smoking in
the living room. Lux opens the door for them, and
Tim informs her that they have a car and they can
go wherever they want to. Worried that they might
get caught, Tim asks Lux where her parents are,
and Lux assures him they're asleep. Chase then
tells her that they need to go since it's getting
late, but Lux wants to wait for a few more minutes
until they're sure her parents won't be coming
down. Lux suggests they use their family car since
it's bigger, and when Lux finally lets them in,
she tells the boys to wait for her sisters in the
living room while she waits for them in the car.
Inside the house, the boys hear a sound from the
basement, so they decide to check it out. There,
they are horrified to see one of the sisters
hanging from the ceiling, so they immediately run
back upstairs and stumble upon another sister's
body on the floor. The boys leave the house in
a haste, never looking back again. The sisters'
bodies are taken away the next day, and the boys
believe that Bonnie hanged herself while they were
waiting in the living room. Meanwhile, Mary put
her head in the oven while Therese overdosed on
sleeping pills. The last of the sisters, Lux, has
taken her life by carbon monoxide poisoning. The
methods the girls used to kill themselves largely
had to do with asphyxiation. This may have been
their way of showing their parents and the boys
how they were suffocating, how the confined world
that gave them no autonomy was stifling to them.
But in the end, this is just speculation. No one
will ever know the why. All that the world can
be sure of is that the girls were tragic, and the
Lisbon couple failed to protect their daughters.
Different media outlets cover the sad story of the
Lisbon sisters. As Mr. and Mrs. Lisbon skip town
to avoid all the gossip about them, Mrs. Lisbon
insists that none of her daughters lacked any
love. While the Lisbons have someone to sell their
house and furniture, Tim and his friends take some
of the Lisbon family photos that were thrown out,
along with the other belongings of the girls.
They want to figure out where things started
going wrong for the family, but no matter how
hard they try, gaps remained, and more questions
are formed. As the adults go back to their lives,
pretending as if nothing horrible has happened in
their neighborhood, Tim and his friends attempt
to forget the Lisbon sisters. However, they
remain haunted by their memories. After 25 years,
Tim and his friends, who are now middle-aged men,
ruminate about how they never found an answer.
But to them, it never really mattered how old the
sisters had been or that they were girls. What
mattered was that they loved the Lisbons and that
they hadn't heard the boys calling out to them.
Though the Virgin Suicides is supposed to tell
the story of these five girls, the story is told
by boys who never understood them, boys who never
truly tried to understand them, and boys who kept
trying to make the story about themselves. Even
the very title of the film reduces these sisters
to their own novelties as if their chastity and
their self-appointed deaths are what define them.
The boys keep trying to piece their puzzle
together, but they never once stopped to look
at these girls as human beings. They never even
questioned why Mrs. Lisbon was the way she was
and why Mr. Lisbon was powerless to stop his wife
from confining his daughters. It’s as if the boys
accepted the situation with a sense of normalcy.
Or maybe they never truly cared about the girls
themselves like they deluded themselves into
thinking. After all, there’s a reason why they
had the most to say about Lux; she was the most
promiscuous of the sisters. She was the easiest
to objectify, to fixate over, and to thirst
over. The boys—now men—even said it themselves:
who the Lisbons were never mattered. What mattered
was that they were the object of their desires.
From the beginning up until the very
end, Cecilia, Lux, Bonnie, Mary,
and Therese were all dehumanized for no reason
beyond their girlhood. Their mother dismissed
their autonomy and their individual selves and
instead saw them as vessels of innocence who
must never be corrupted, and the boys saw
them as something divine and otherworldly.
From Cecilia’s diary, the boys concluded that
girls were profound and mystical creatures even
though her diary entries were mundane. They filled
in the gaps themselves to keep their romanticized
views of the girls’ beings. Going back to Lux,
why did Trip leave her vulnerable and alone on
the football field? Likely, it was because he
cracked at the angelic mystique of Lux Lisbon,
and when she slept with him, he caught a
glimpse of what she was: a human. Just human.
And because the boys kept ignoring just
what the girls were, they became deaf to
their cries. It wasn’t the girls who didn’t hear
the boys calling out to them. It was the boys,
the parents, the neighbors—it was everyone who
failed to hear the girls calling out to them.